
This is a draft of a treatment of modal-style operators (e.g. "might",
"typically") in OWL.

It is intended to give a treatment of existing relations such as
"capable of" and provide a way of linking these pseudo-class-level
relations to observable non-qualified instance-level relations.

The goal is to have a practical set of axioms and axiom
transformations that can be used for query-answering rather than a
philosophical treatment.

THIS IS AN EARLY DRAFT. It combines some practical approaches with
more radical suggestions, these portions may be split out in future.

## Background

Consider the following statements:

 * every sperm cell fises with an egg cell
 * every Shh protein is involved in heart development
 * every british car drives on the left
 * everyone must obey the law
 * every heart pumps blood
 * every mouse has a tail
 * every aspirin treats a headache

Every statement is false, as there exist numerous exceptions, with
sometimes exceptions being in the majority.

However, it seems there is some kind of genuine, useful, queryable
relationship between the class on the left and the class on the
right. How do we capture this?

One way to do this is to attach an operator to each
sentence. Informally, we can draft a list of modal linguistic
operators, ordered roughly in terms of strength:

 * sometimes
 * may
 * typically
 * is designed to
 * has evolved to
 * is obliged to
 * is capable of
 * is known to
 * necessarily, except under rare circumstances

We can use the linguistic qualifiers to name a series of
relationships, such as "may participate in" (see for example, the NCI
Thesaurus). This is slightly unsatisfying. How do these qualified
relations relate to their unqualified counterparts? When should the
qualified versions be used over the unqualified ones? When do these
become weak to the point of uselessness? This is important for
developing and querying over knowledge bases in a consistent manner.

These operators can be viewed as *modal* operators. Modal logic
provides a system for operating on these operators (typically
"necessity" and "possibility"). However, modal logic may introduce
additional commitments and machinery, and in any case OWL does not
support modal logic.  How do we go about encoding our qualifiers in
OWL?

(Discussion of Shulze et al paper on ELF1 here)

(Need more details on why modal logic slightly different - "competes"
with OWL subClassOf relations?)

## OWL Pattern

For every modal qualifier in our domain, we create a modal operator
object property. Call this set of properties M = m1, m2, ... (we will
return later to the implications of treating the operator as an object
property).

We also have a set of unqualified "pure" object properties in our
domain. Call this set P = p1, p2, ...

We can name any qualified propert _mp_ from the cross product MP = M x
P.

For any _mp_ in MP, we add an axiom:

    mp <- m *o* p

This has the side effect of inheriting a _safe_ set of characteristics
from p. For example, if p is transitive, then _mp_ will hold for any
chain x1 m x2 p x3 p x4 ... p xn. However, other characteristics such
as symmetry or functional will *not* carry over.

Note that in OWL we cannot state the reciprocal, i.e. mp -> m *o* p,
however, we could define a macro mp <-> m *o* p, such that an
existential is introduced when going in the reverse direction.

We further distinguish a subset M^s of M. These are the set of
*reflexive* or self-modal operators. If m is in M^s then mp implies p,
i.e.
  
    for all mp in MP, m in M^s, p in P, add:
      mp <- p

We are are working in an expressive enough variant of OWL, we can add

    for all m in M^s, add: Reflexive(m)

Or

    for all m in M^s, add: C SubClassOf M self

For some appropriately high-level C

The decision as to which operators to place in M^s is domain-specific,
with the exception of operators such as "some" or "possibly", if it is
already included in M. Intuitively, if a relation holds, for some pair
then there is some pair for which it holds, and it is possible for
that relation to hold.

In practical terms, the self-modal operators make lattice-like
subproperty hierarchies. E.g. given a base property like "part of" and
a base subproperty like "boundary part of":

       may be part of
      /             \
    part of    may be boundary part of
      \             /
      boundary part of

## Insulation characteristics

One of the main desirable characteristics of applying an operator is
to insulate from exceptions. For example, the following yields no
contradiction:

    Shh SubClassOf typically-involved-in some Heart-Development
    ssh0001 Type Shh
    not(ssh0001 involved-in some Heart-Development)

Furthermore, exception-like structures can easily be queried, e.g. in
the ABox:

    SELECT * WHERE
     { ?i Type typically-R some ?X . NOT(?i Type R some ?X) }

## Models and use of existential quantification

Treating operators as object properties has implications for the
models implied by our ontologies and knowledge bases.

For example, given a TBox axiom:

    mouse SubClassOf typically-has-part some tail

And

    mouse1 Type Mouse

There is a model:

    mouse1 typically x
    x has-part t
    t Type tail

This poses the question: what is x? The domain modeler may choose to
simply ignore this question and treat x as an artifact of
formalization of typicality in OWL. Alternatively, the domain modeler
may choose to give an account in a number of different ways, perhaps
invoking possible-worlds, or a rea; evolutionary ancestor. See further
on in this document.

One possibility is to treat _x_ as some kind of dispositional
entity. We can introduce a new relation that connects a disposition to
a situation in which it comes about (say "materialized-by"). This
affords us the possibility of using a universal quantifier, e.g.

    mouse1 typically x
    x materialized-as ONLY (has-part some Tail)

Aside: Note that this can be seen as a generalization of BFO
dispositions (which are realized by processes). We could perhaps use
BFO dispostions if we are allowed some kind of process-IC relation
such as "being", such that any state-of-affairs could be encoded by a
being-process.

This may be viewed as philosophically preferable by some on the
grounds of parsimony and realism: it does not introduce any new
physical entities, imagined or otherwise. However, one could still
question the introduction of a new invisible dispositional entity x,
(if one wanted to go down that rabbit hole).

However, it is not clear that this
universal-restriction-dispositional-entity (URDE) pattern offers any
computational advantages over the existential-modal-chain (EMC)
pattern. In fact it is arguably worse, as it forces us to step outside
EL++, and it introduces other difficulties.

I will return to this in the discussion. The use of existentials and
new material individuals (EMC) may be defensible from a realist
viewpoint for many domains.

## Domain-specific application

One of the primary use cases is in molecular biology, where we wish to
make statements of genes and gene products in general, but must be
wary of being too strong.

E.g. intuitively we may say

    Shh-protein involved-in Heart-development

But there may be many instances of Shh-protein that do not.

Similarly, at a cellular level:

    photoreceptor cell involved-in detection-of-light-stimulus

But this may not always be true. This poses genuine practical problems
if we are to make use of stromg disjointness axioms in our ontology
that will be overridden by real-world situations.

The capable_of and capable_of_part_of relations were introduced to
deal with this. These were conceived as shortcuts, e.g.:

    photoreceptor cell SubClassOf capable_of some detection-of-light-stimulus
    ==>
    photoreceptor cell SubClassOf bearer-of some (realized-by only detection-of-light-stimulus)

Or, using the GCI interpretation    

    photoreceptor cell SubClassOf capable_of some detection-of-light-stimulus
    +
    capable_of some detection-of-light-stimulus SubClassOf bearer-of some (realized-by only detection-of-light-stimulus)

In practice, the expansion step has not been required for useful
reasoning. Note that this only works for processes (although see above
for a generalization).

An alternate formalism is to treat capable_of as the modal form of
some base relation, e.g. "executes", "agent in" or "enables", that
holds between a material entity and a process that is actively being
carried out by that material entity. i.e.

    capable_of <-> prototypically *o* enables

Note that OWL cannot express "<->" here we treat this as an axiom
replacement operation prior to reasoning.

Thus it is valid to transform:

    photoreceptor cell SubClassOf capable_of some detection-of-light-stimulus

To:

    photoreceptor cell SubClassOf prototypically some (enables some detection-of-light-stimulus)

From a terminological perspective it may be preferable to name the
modal property "has prototype". Although we still have not addressed
the question of what it means to be a prototype, and whether the
prototypical individual has a real-world interpretation, or is some
artifact present in the model but to be ignored.

There are a variety of options here. One is to invoke possible-worlds
semantics, which has the advantage of aligning well with treatments of
modal logics (note that this does not entail any kind of many-world
interpretation in the "real world").

However, this may not be necessary. We can argue that the prototype
exists in this world - possibly in the past (for example, a strong
evolutionary interpretation would be to place the prototype as the
ancestor). This real-existing-prototype has only properties that
we could expect to see propagated in the modal form.

The counter-argument is that there are arguably cases where no such
prototype exists. For example, our prototype photoreceptor may have
the property of being part of a vermiform animal. But we woould not
say that photoreceptors prototypically are part of worms.

## Generalization from prototypical models

If we observe 3 individuals connected in a chain a part-of b part-of
c, where we have class assertions A(a), B(a), C(c), we cannot infer
anything about As, Bs or Cs in general.

We can find the most specific class expression for each individual. E.g.

    a Type A and part-of some B and part-of some C

But not

    A SubClassOf part-of some B

However, sometimes it may be desirable to make some kind of leap like
this, possibly introducing a modal qualifier.

If we introduce an additional assertion

    A SubClassOf prototype value a

Informally we can think of this as saying "the individual a serves as
a prototype for all As".

Given this, and given that we have iplemented the modal axiom patterns
described above, we entail

    A SubClassOf prototypically-part-of some B

As well as

    A SubClassOf prototypically-part-of some (B and part-of some C)

And assuming transitivity of part-of:

    A SubClassOf prototypically-part-of some C

Note we also get entailment to individuals as well:

    A SubClassOf prototypically-part-of value b
    A SubClassOf prototypically-part-of value c

This is all entailed by our axioms, and not a matter of debate. What
is perhaps debatable is the utility and appropriateness of this. When
does it suffice to say something is "prototypical" (or any other modal
qualifier)? When does this yield unintended consequences?

At the risk of circular reasoning, I would say this is appropriate
whenever one regards a certain state-of-affairs as prototypical, and
useful whenever one wishes to make queries at the class level about
prototypical relationships. For example, even though I do not wish to
state that all Shhs ar involved in heart development, I may wish to
make DL queries for "M-involved-in Heart-Development" and get back Shh
for some modal operator M.

As far as unintended consequences go, so long as we restrict our ABox
assertions to things that (circularly) we deem to hold prototypically,
all entailments are intended (tautology). This is potentially a weak
point, that seems to rely on the closed world assumption to preserve
intendedness. In the real world, our assertions are a subset of the
web of true sentences that hold, not all of which we would wish to
treat as prototypical (e.g. they may connect to a particular physical
organism that is unique in its own way, such as being wormlike).

Practically, I would argue that this is not a problem. Formally, we
are dividing the ABox into two - a part that we map to observed
individuals in the world, and another part that is intentionally
circumscribed / underspecified and has no commitment to a mapping to
*specific* observed individuals in the world. This second ABox can be
seen as having TBox-like characteristics.

## Applications to material entity ontologies

One issue with existing material entity ontologies such as anatomy
ontologies is the co-reference issue.

E.g.

    Limb SubClassOf part-of some Tetrapod
    Tetrapod SubClassOf has-part some Limb

First of all, the assertion of dual TBox axioms can be unintuitive to
those not versed in DLs. Second, the ontology above admits some
unintended models, e.g.

    Limb(limb1)
    Limb(limb2)
    Tetrapod(t1)
    Tetrapod(t2)
    t1 != t2
    limb1 != limb2
    limb1 part-of t1 has-part limb2 part-of t2

This could potentially be extended to a strange cyclical daisy chain
or tetrapods, or some Borgesian infinite tetrapod loop.

Similarly, it is impossible to represent a cyclic structure in a TBox,
due to their tree properties. It is impossible to distinguish a linear
chain of carbons from a cycle of carbons due to the co-reference
problem.

On a practical level, this can lead to ontologies that are too weak
for certain kinds of query-answering. For anatomy ontologies designed
to answer gene expression queries there is no problem, but these are
axiomatically weak anyway.

A radically different way of building an ontology is a prototype-based
approach. Here we may start with an ABox:

    digit1 part-of autopod1
    digit2 part-of autopod1
    digit3 part-of autopod1
    digit4 part-of autopod1
    digit5 part-of autopod1
    autopod1 connected-to zeugopod1
    zeugopod1 connected-to stylopod1
    stylopod1 connected-to body1
    autopod1 part-of body1
    zeugopod1 part-of body1
    stylopod1 part-of body1

(we assume class assertions of the form X(X_n), and we also assume
everything is mutually different).

This can be drawn in a graph structure that any anatomist can
understand.

The strict model-theoretic interpretation is unambiguous.

However, the model in itself has no predictive power or generalization
capabilities. We're simply describing a state of affairs, and not
talking about digits, limbs in general.

The traditional ontologist way to generalize would be to make TBox
axioms, but as discussed above, these can be weaker than expected due
to the tree-model no-variable property of DL. In addition, there is
the classic problem of exceptions. This is usually handled by
weakening in certain directions (e.g. has-parts are less likely to
hold more generally), yielding a weaker model, arbitrarily deciding
some cutoff (e.g. we rule amputated digits to ectopic structures to be
out of scope). This can cause problems when integrating mutant
phenotype and canonical anatomy (see Hoehndorf et al).

A prototype-based approach arguably better recapitulates both
biologists cognitive models (see Lakoff) and biological reality
(evolution is not essentialist - it takes prototypes and tweaks them -
any "classes" may be artificial).

How might this work?

We might start off with an ABox model such as the one above. We may
conceive of these as observations, or as a hypothetical model
(i.e. TBox-like ABox), or even as the evolutionary ancestor.

We might then start adding assertions of the form:

  Limb SubClassOf prototype value limb1

We would then infer that limbs prototypically have stylopods, zeugopods, autopods, digits.

We _also_ infer that autopods prototypically have 5 digits. This may or
may not be a problem depending on how we wish to use the operatir
"prototypically". We have the option of making the prototypes more restricted, e.g.

  (Limb and part_of some Human) SubClassOf prototype value limb1

Or of introducing different operators, e.g. "canonical", "prototypically".

Obviously this is a radically different way of approaching ontology
building. There may be disavantages in terms of not being able to
leverage DL tooling and reasoning to the same extent. New kinds of
tooling, e.g. analogy-based reasoning may be required. Some of these
already exist, e.g. DL-learner. Alteratively it could be argued that
we would use the DL tooling where it belongs and offers more freedom
for modeling the messiness of biology without forcing an essentialist
template on everything.

There is no reasons why both approaches can't live side by side. Most
would agree that there are some things for which TBox modeling makes
sense - e.g. CARO type classes, GO slims, much of GO cell
component. There are also things for which an ABox makes
sense. E.g. data, certain kinds of observations. Then there are things
in the middle - e.g. statements about gene products and
complexes. Here it makes sense to be pragmatic, and to model according
to what kinds of questions are being asked. The framework introduced
here provides a way to move things between levels in a principled way.

